there's a group of people in Kenya
people across oceans to go see them
these people are tall they jump high
they were red and they kill lions you
might be wondering who is people these
are the Maasai's you know what's cool
I'm actually one of them the Messiah is
the boys are brought up to be warriors
the girls are brought up to be mothers
when I was five years old I found out
that I was engaged to be married as soon
as I reached puberty my mother my
grandmother my aunt is the constantly
reminded me that your husband just
passed by cool yeah
and everything I had to do from that
moment was to prepare me to be a perfect
woman at age 12 my day started at 5:00
in the morning milking the cows sweeping
the house cooking for my siblings
collecting water firewood I did
everything that I needed to do to become
a perfect wife I went to school I went
to school not because the masa is women
or girls were going to school because my
mother was denied an education and she
constantly reminded me and my siblings
that she never wanted us to live the
life she was living why did she say that
my father lived as a man my father
worked as a policeman in the city he
came home once a year we didn't see him
for sometimes even two years whenever he
came home it was a different case my
mother walked had in the farm to bring
to grow crops that we can eat she read
the cows and the goats so that she can
care for us but when my father came he
would sell the cows he will sell the
products we had and he went and drinked
with his friends in in the bus because
my mother was a woman she was not
allowed to own any property and by
default everything in my family anyway
belongs to my father so he had the right
and if my mother ever questioned him she
beat her abused her and really it was
difficult when I went to school I had a
dream I wanted to become a teacher
teachers looked nice they were nice
dresses high-heeled shoes I found out
later that they uncomfortable but I
admired it
but most of all the teacher was just
writing in the board not had work that's
what I thought
compared to what I was doing in the fam
so I wanted to become a teacher I worked
hard in school but when I was in eighth
grade it was a determining factor in our
tradition there's a ceremony that girls
have to undergo to become women and it's
a rite of passage two women would and
then I was just finishing my eighth
grade and that was a transition for me
to go to high school
this was the crossroad once I go through
this tradition I was going to become a
wife well my dream of becoming a teacher
will not come to pass so I talk I had to
come up with a plan to figure these
things out I talked to my father I did
something that most girls have never
done I told my father I will only go
through this ceremony if you let me go
back to school there is on why if I ran
away my father will have a stigma people
will be calling him the father of that
girl who didn't go through the ceremony
it was a shameful thing for him to carry
the rest of his life
so he figure out well he said okay we'll
go to you'll go to school after the
ceremony I did the ceremony happened
it's a whole week long of excitements
it's a ceremony people are enjoying and
the day before the actual ceremony
happens we were dancing having
excitement and through all the night we
did not sleep the actual day came and we
walk out of the house that we were
dancing as we danced and danced we
walked out to the courtyard and there
were a bunch of people waiting they were
all in a circle and as we danced and
danced we approached this circle of
women men women children everybody was
there there was a woman sitting in the
middle of it and this woman was waiting
to hold us and ice I was the fast they
were my sisters and a couple of other
girls and as I approached her she looked
at me and I sat down
and I sat down and I opened my legs as I
opened my leg another woman came and
this woman was carrying a knife and she
carried the knife she walked toward me
and she held my clitoris and she cut it
off as you can imagine I bled I bled
after bleeding for a while I fainted
thereafter it's something that so many
girls I'm lucky I never died but many
died it's practice it's no anesthesia
it's a rusty old knife and it was
difficult I was lucky because one also
my mum did something that most women
don't do three days later after
everybody has left the home my mum went
and brought on us we were taken care of
three weeks later I was healed and I was
back in high school I will sort
determine to be a teacher now so that I
can make a difference in my family well
while I was in high school something
happened I met another young gentleman
from our village who had been to the
University of Oregon
this man was wearing white t-shirt jeans
a camera um white sneakers and I'm
talking about white sneakers is
something about clothes I think and
shoes I'm tie my sneakers and it is in a
village that doesn't even have paved
roads
it was quite attractive
I told it well um I want to go to where
you are because this man looked very
happy and I had admired that
and he told me well what do you mean you
want to go don't you have a husband
waiting for you and I told him don't
worry about that part just tell me how
to get there this gentleman he helped me
while I was in high school also my dad
was sick he got stroke and he was really
really sick so he really couldn't tell
me what to do next
but the problem is my father is not the
only father I have everybody who is my
dad's age male in the community is my
father by default my uncles all of them
and they dictate what my future is so
the news came I applied to school and I
was accepted to randolph-macon Woman's
College in Lynchburg Virginia
and I couldn't come without the support
of the village because I needed to raise
money to buy the air ticket I got a
scholarship but I needed to get myself
here but I needed the support of the
village and here again when they man had
and the people had that I'm woman had
gotten us an opportunity to go to school
they said what a lost opportunity this
should have been given to a boy we can't
do this so I went back and I had go back
to the tradition there's a believing
among our people that morning brings
good news so I had to come up with
something to do with the morning because
there's good news in the morning and in
the village also this one chief for pass
on male and elder who has if he says yes
everybody will follow him so I went to
him very early in the morning as the
sunrise first thing he sees when he
wakes opens his door his it's me my
child what are you doing here well dad I
need help can you support me to go to
America I promised him that I'll be the
best girl I will come back anything they
wanted after that I will do it for them
he said well but I can't do it alone he
gave me a list of other 15 men that I
went 16 more men every single morning
I went and visited them they all came
together the village the women the men
everybody came together to support me to
come to get an education
I arrived in America as you can imagine
what did I find
I found snow
I found warmer the vacuum cleaners and
lots of food in the cafeteria I was in a
bland of Plenty I enjoyed myself but
during that moment while I was here I
discovered alone a lot of things I
learned that that ceremony that I went
through when I was 13 years old it was
called female genital mutilation I
learned that it was against the law in
Kenya I learned that I do not have to
trade part of my body to get an
education I had a right and as we speak
right now three million girls in Africa
are at risk of undergoing through this
mutilation I learned that my mom had a
right to own property I learned that she
did not have to be abused because she's
a woman those things may be angry I
wanted to do something as I went back
every time I went I found that my
neighbor's girls were getting married
they were getting mutilated and here
after I graduated from here working and
worked at the UN I went back to school
to get my graduate work the constant cry
of these girls was on my face I had to
do something as I went back I started
talking to the men to the village and
mothers and I said I want to give back
the way I had promised you that I would
come back and help you what do you need
as I speak to the women they told me you
know what we need we really need a
school for girls day because they had
not been any school for girls and the
reason they wanted the school for girls
is because when a girl is raped when
she's walking to school
the mother is blamed for that if she got
pregnant before she got married the
mother is blamed for that and she is
punished she's beaten they said we
wanted to put our girls in a safe place
as soon as we moved and I went to talk
to their fathers their fathers of course
you can imagine what they said we want a
school for boys and I said well there
are a couple of many men from my village
who have been out and they have got an
education why can't they build a school
for boys and I'll build a school for
girls that made sense and they agreed
and I told them I wanted them to show me
a sign of commitment and they did they
donated land where we built the girl
school we have I want you to meet one of
the girls in that school Angeline came
to apply for the school and she did not
meet any criterias that we had she's an
orphan yes we could have taken half of
that but she was older she was 12 years
old and we're taking girls who were in
fourth grade everybody was telling us
Angeline had been moving from one place
because she's enough and she has no
mother she has no father moving from one
grandmother's house to another one from
auntie's to auntie's she had no
stabilities in her life
and people said and I looked at her I
remember that day and I saw something
beyond what I was seeing in Angeline and
yes she was older to be in fourth grade
we gave her the opportunity to come to
the class five months later that is
Angeline
a transformation had begun in her life
Angelina wants to be a pilot so that she
can fly around the world into a
difference she was not the top student
well with rokosz now she's the best
student not just in our school but in
the entire division that we are in she
is showing different that Sharon that's
five years later as Evelyn five months
later that is the difference that we are
making as a new dawn is happening in my
school a new beginning is happening
girls as we speak right now 125 girls
will never be mutilated 125 girls will
not be married when they're 12 years old
125 girls are creating and achieving
their dreams this is the data thing that
we are doing giving them opportunities
that they can rise as we speak right
now women and not being beaten because
of the revelations we've started in our
community
I want to challenge you today you're
listening to me because you are here
very optimistic you are somebody who is
so passionate you are somebody who wants
to see a better world you are somebody
who wants to see the war ends no poverty
you are somebody who wants to make a
difference you're somebody who wants to
make our tomorrow better I want to
challenge you today that you be the fast
because people will follow you be the
fast people will follow you
be bold stand up be fearless be
confident move out because as you change
your world you see change your community
as we believe that we are impacting one
girl one family one village one country
at a time we are making a difference so
if you change your world you're going to
change your community you're going to
change your country and think about that
if you do that and I do that and we're
going to create a better future for our
children for your children for our
grandchildren and we will live in a very
peaceful world thank you very much
you